Astro 5.5 blog (#1429)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-550.mdx

homepageLink:
  title: 'Astro 5.5'
  subtitle: 'Available now!'
publishDate: '2025-03-11'
authors:
  - matt
coverImage: '/src/content/blog/_images/astro-550/blog-post-5-5.webp'
socialImage: '/src/content/blog/_images/astro-550/og-astro-5-5.webp'
lang: 'en'
---

import BlogContentImage from '/src/components/BlogContentImage.astro';

**Astro 5.5 dives deep with better support for diagramming tools, improved Markdown compatibility, and type-safe sessions!**

🧜‍♀️ Dive into a sea of new features with these improvements to Astro:

- [**Better support for diagramming tools in Markdown**](#better-support-for-diagramming-tools-in-markdown)
- [**Type-safe experimental sessions**](#type-safe-experimental-sessions)
- [**Improved heading ID compatibility**](#improved-heading-id-compatibility)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Better support for diagramming tools in Markdown

> Tools like Mermaid and D2 let you define charts and diagrams in code blocks in Markdown, which are then rendered inside the content. Until now, using these in Astro could be tricky, because syntax highlighting would interfere with how the code blocks are rendered. Astro 5.5 introduces a new `excludeLangs` option in your Markdown configuration that makes it possible to skip syntax highlighting for specific language code blocks. This unlocks the ability to use tools like these without disabling syntax highlighting for other blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tools like Mermaid and D2 let you define charts and diagrams in code blocks in Markdown, which are then rendered inside the content. Until now, using these in Astro could be tricky, because Astro's default syntax highlighting would interfere with how the code blocks were rendered.

Astro 5.5 introduces a new `excludeLangs` option in your Markdown configuration that makes it possible to skip syntax highlighting for specific language code blocks. This unlocks the ability to use tools like these without disabling syntax highlighting for other blocks.
```

Here's an example of how to configure Astro to disable highlighting for the `mermaid` language after installing the [`rehype-mermaid` plugin](https://github.com/remcohaszing/rehype-mermaid):

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import rehypeMermaid from 'rehype-mermaid';

export default defineConfig({
	markdown: {
		syntaxHighlight: {
			type: 'shiki',
			excludeLangs: ['mermaid', 'math'],
		},
		rehypePlugins: [rehypeMermaid],
	},
});
```

> Then you can create diagrams directly in your Markdown content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, you can create diagrams directly in your Markdown content:
```

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
declare namespace App {
	interface SessionData {
		user: {
			id: string;
			email: string;
		};
		lastLogin: Date;
	}
}
```

This is optional, and any keys not defined in this interface will be treated as `any`. However, defining the types will provide accurate type checking and autocomplete when working with session data in your site:

```astro
---
const user = await Astro.session.get('user');
// `user` is properly typed as `{ id: string; email: string; } | undefined`

const something = await Astro.session.get('something');
// `something` is typed as `any` since it's not defined in the interface

// TypeScript will catch this error:
Astro.session.set('user', 1); // Error: Type 'number' is not assignable to type '{ id: string; email: string; }'
---
```

This improvement makes working with sessions in Astro more reliable and helps catch potential errors at development time rather than at runtime.

For more information, see the [experimental session docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/sessions/#session-data-types).

## Improved heading ID compatibility

> Astro 5.5 introduces a new `experimental.headingIdCompat` flag that improves compatibility with how heading IDs are generated in other Markdown processors like those used by GitHub and npm.

Reviewer 2: Adding on to Sarah’s suggestion, we can probably also link the new docs here:

```suggestion
Astro 5.5 introduces a new [`experimental.headingIdCompat`](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/heading-id-compat/) flag that generates heading IDs consistent with other common Markdown processors like those used by GitHub and npm.
```

> By default, Astro removes trailing dashes from the end of IDs it generates for headings containing special characters. This behavior differs from other common Markdown processors, which can cause inconsistencies when linking to headings across different platforms.

Author: I think "non-standard" makes it sound like it's incorrect, rather than just a choice.

> By default, Astro removes trailing dashes from the end of IDs it generates for headings containing special characters. This behavior differs from other common Markdown processors, which can cause inconsistencies when linking to headings across different platforms.

Reviewer 2: I think _technically_ there’s no “standard” in the specification sense (heading IDs aren’t covered by things like CommonMark), more that there’s a convention quite a few platforms and tools follow, which this option aligns us with.

> By default, Astro removes trailing dashes from the end of IDs it generates for headings containing special characters. This behavior differs from other common Markdown processors, which can cause inconsistencies when linking to headings across different platforms.

Reviewer: I think the sentence works without `non-standard` and just say "This behavior..." ?

> By default, Astro removes trailing dashes from the end of IDs it generates for headings containing special characters. This behavior differs from other common Markdown processors, which can cause inconsistencies when linking to headings across different platforms.

Author: But then it's unclear _why_ it can cause inconsistencies

---
title: 'Astro 5.5'
description: 'Astro 5.5 dives deep with better support for diagramming tools, improved Markdown compatibility, and type-safe sessions!'
homepageLink:
  title: 'Astro 5.5'
  subtitle: 'Available now!'

> publishDate: '2025-03-11'

Author: I always forget to forward-date it!

🧜‍♀️ Dive into a sea of new features with these improvements to Astro:

- [**Better support for diagramming tools in Markdown**](#better-support-for-diagramming-tools-in-markdown)
- [**Type-safe experimental sessions**](#type-safe-experimental-sessions)
- [**Improved heading ID compatibility**](#improved-heading-id-compatibility)
- [**Experimental: preserve order of style and script tags**](#experimental-preserve-order-of-style-and-script-tags)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Better support for diagramming tools in Markdown

Tools like Mermaid and D2 let you define charts and diagrams in code blocks in Markdown, which are then rendered inside the content. Until now, using these in Astro could be tricky, because Astro's default syntax highlighting would interfere with how the code blocks were rendered.

> Astro 5.5 introduces a new `excludeLangs` option in your Markdown configuration that makes it possible to skip syntax highlighting for specific language code blocks. This unlocks the ability to use tools like these without disabling syntax highlighting for other blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro 5.5 introduces a new [`excludeLangs`](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/configuration-reference/#markdownsyntaxhighlightexcludelangs) option in your Markdown configuration that makes it possible to skip syntax highlighting for specific language code blocks. This unlocks the ability to use tools like these without disabling syntax highlighting for other blocks.
```
Just linking now that it's live in docs!

For more information, see the [experimental sessions docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/sessions/#session-data-types).

## Improved heading ID compatibility

Astro 5.5 introduces a new [`experimental.headingIdCompat`](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/heading-id-compat/) flag that generates heading IDs consistent with other common Markdown processors like those used by GitHub and npm.

By default, Astro removes trailing dashes from the end of IDs it generates for headings containing special characters. This behavior differs from other common Markdown processors, which can cause inconsistencies when linking to headings across different platforms.

With the new configuration flag, you can now ensure your heading IDs follow the same convention as other platforms:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
	experimental: {
		headingIdCompat: true,
	},
});
```

This is particularly useful for sites that might have anchor links shared between GitHub, npm documentation, and your Astro website.

## Experimental: preserve order of style and script tags

> Experimental flags aren't only for cool new features. Sometimes, things just have to *change*.  We also use experimental flags to carefully introduce you to breaking changes that will eventually become the new default behavior. `experimental.preserveScriptOrder` is one of them!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Experimental flags aren't only for cool new features. Sometimes, things just have to *change*.  We also use experimental flags to carefully introduce you to breaking changes that will eventually become the new default behavior. [`experimental.preserveScriptOrder`](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/preserve-scripts-order/) is one of them!
```

When rendering multiple `<style>` and `<script>` tags on the same page, Astro currently reverses their order in your generated HTML output. This can give unexpected results, for example CSS styles that apply in development mode being overridden by earlier style tags once your site is built.

You can enable it in your configuration like this:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    preserveScriptOrder: true,
  },
});
```

> With the new `preserveScriptOrder` flag enabled, Astro will generate your styles and scripts in the order they are defined. If you were previously compensating for Astro's behavior by writing these out of order, you will need to update your code. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the new `preserveScriptOrder` flag set to `true`, Astro will generate your styles and scripts in the order they are defined. If you were previously compensating for Astro's behavior by writing these out of order, you will need to update your code. 
```

Just a suggestion

By default, Astro removes trailing dashes from the end of IDs it generates for headings containing special characters. This behavior differs from other common Markdown processors, which can cause inconsistencies when linking to headings across different platforms.

With the new configuration flag, you can now ensure your heading IDs follow the same convention as other platforms:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
	experimental: {
		headingIdCompat: true,
	},
});
```

This is particularly useful for sites that might have anchor links shared between GitHub, npm documentation, and your Astro website.

## Experimental: preserve order of style and script tags

Currently, Astro reverses the order of style and script tags in the generated HTML output, which can give unexpected results. Changing this to preserve the order is a breaking change, so it's behind an experimental flag in Astro 5.5. 

You can enable it in your configuration like this:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    preserveScriptOrder: true,
  },
});
```

> As an example, consider these styles:
> 
> ```astro
> <style>
>   body {
>     background-color: red;
>   }
> </style>
> <style>
>   body {
>     background-color: yellow;
>   }
> </style>
> ```
> 
> By default, Astro will generate the following output:
> 
> ```html
> <style>
>   body {
>     background-color: yellow;
>   }
>   body {
>     background-color: red;
>   }
> </style>
> ```
> 
> With the new `preserveScriptOrder` flag enabled, Astro will generate the styles in the order they are defined:
> 
> ```html
> <style>
>   body {
>     background-color: red;
>   }
>   body {
>     background-color: yellow;
>   }
> </style>
> ``` 
> 
> 
> This is likely to become the default behavior in Astro 6, so it's a good idea to test your site with this flag enabled to ensure it works as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new `preserveScriptOrder` flag enabled, Astro will generate your styles and scripts in the order they are defined. If you were previously compensating for Astro's behavior by writing these out of order, you will need to update your code. 

We think this change makes sense in the long run for everyone. Thanks to `@JaneSmith` for first identifying this issue, and `@theOtterLord` for contributing the compiler fix!
```
